README.md, before:

# django-serializable-model

Django classes to make your models, managers, and querysets serializable, with built-in support for related objects in ~100 LoC (shorter than this README!)


## Usage

Simplest use case, just implements the `.serialize()` function on a model:

```python
from django.db import models
from django-serializable-model import SerializableModel


class User(SerializableModel):
    email = models.CharField(max_length=765, blank=True)
    name = models.CharField(max_length=100)


new_user = User.objects.create(
    name='John Doe',
    email='john@doe.com',
)

print new_user.serialize()
# {'id': 1, 'email': 'john@doe.com', 'name': 'John Doe'}
```

<br>

With an override of the default `.serialize()` function to only include whitelisted fields in the serialized dictionary:

```python
from django.db import models
from django-serializable-model import SerializableModel


class User(SerializableModel):
    email = models.CharField(max_length=765, blank=True)
    name = models.CharField(max_length=100)
    # whitelisted fields that are allowed to be seen
    WHITELISTED_FIELDS = set([
        'name',
    ])


    def serialize(self, *args, **kwargs):
        """Override serialize method to only serialize whitelisted fields"""
        fields = kwargs.pop('fields', self.WHITELISTED_FIELDS)
        return super(User, self).serialize(*args, fields=fields)


new_user = User.objects.create(
    name='John Doe',
    email='john@doe.com',
)

print new_user.serialize()
# {'name': 'John Doe'}
```

<br>

With a simple, one-to-one relation:

```python
from django.db import models
from django-serializable-model import SerializableModel


class User(SerializableModel):
    email = models.CharField(max_length=765, blank=True)
    name = models.CharField(max_length=100)


class Settings(SerializableModel):
    user = models.OneToOneField(User, primary_key=True)
    email_notifications = models.BooleanField(default=False)

    def serialize(self, *args):
        """Override serialize method to not serialize the user field"""
        return super(Settings, self).serialize(*args, exclude=['user'])


new_user = User.objects.create(
    name='John Doe',
    email='john@doe.com',
)
Settings.objects.create(user=new_user)

new_user_refreshed = User.objects.select_related('settings').get(pk=new_user.pk)

print new_user_refreshed.serialize()
# {'id': 1, 'email': 'john@doe.com', 'name': 'John Doe'}

# recursively serialize Settings object by passing the join in
print new_user_refreshed.serialize('settings')
# {'id': 1, 'email': 'john@doe.com', 'settings': {'email_notifications': False}, 'name': 'John Doe'}
```

<br>

With a foreign key relation:

```python
from django.db import models
from django-serializable-model import SerializableModel


class User(SerializableModel):
    email = models.CharField(max_length=765, blank=True)
    name = models.CharField(max_length=100)


class Post(SerializableModel):
    user = models.ForeignKey(User)
    text = models.TextField()


new_user = User.objects.create(
    name='John Doe',
    email='john@doe.com',
)
Post.objects.create(user=new_user, text='wat a nice post')
Post.objects.create(user=new_user, text='another nice post')

# called on QuerySet
print Post.objects.all().serialize()
# [{'id': 1, 'text': 'wat a nice post', 'user_id': 1}, {'id': 2, 'text': 'another nice post', 'user_id': 1}]
# adds an _id to the foreign key name, just like when using `.values()`

# called on Manager
user1 = User.objects.get(pk=new_user.pk)
print user1.post_set.serialize()
# [{'id': 1, 'text': 'wat a nice post', 'user_id': 1}, {'id': 2, 'text': 'another nice post', 'user_id': 1}]

# recursively serialize Post objects by passing the join in
print User.objects.prefetch_related('post_set').get(pk=new_user.pk).serialize('post_set')
"""
{
    'id': 1,
    'email': 'john@doe.com',
    'name': 'John Doe',
    'post_set': [{'id': 1, 'text': 'wat a nice post', 'user_id': 1}, {'id': 2, 'text': 'another nice post', 'user_id': 1}]
}
"""
```

<br>

`.serialize` takes in any number of joins as its `*args` and they can be of any depth, using the same `__` syntax as `prefetch_related`. This means if your `Post` object also had `Comment` objects, you could write:

`User.objects.prefetch_related('post_set__comment_set').serialize('post_set__comment_set')`

and get an array of `Comment` dictionaries within each `Post` dictionary.


### JSON and APIs

Since `.serialize` outputs a dictionary, one can turn it into JSON simply by using `json.dumps` on the dictionary.

If you're building an API, you can use `JSONResponse` on the dictionary as well.


## How it works

Implementing a `.serialize` method on Models, Managers, and QuerySets allows for easily customizable whitelists and blacklists (among other things) on a per Model basis.
This type of behavior was not possible a simple recursive version of `model_to_dict`, but is often necessary for various security measures and overrides.
In order to recurse over relations / joins, it accepts the same arguments as the familiar `prefetch_related`, which, in my use cases, often immediately precedes the `.serialize` calls.
`.serialize` also uses a custom `model_to_dict` function that behaves a bit differently than the built-in one in a variety of ways that are more expected when building an API (see the docstring).

I'd encourage you to read the source code, since it's shorter than this README :)


## Compatibility

Should work with Django 1.5-1.9 with Python 2.7.

Likely works with Django 1.10 and 1.11, though not 100% sure that `._meta.fields` usage works the same way in these.

Will have some problems with Django 2.0 as this may not work with Python 3 and because the Manager's `use_for_related_fields` has been removed.

Have not confirmed if this works with earlier versions yet, or with different versions of Python.

This was originally used in an older Django 1.5 codebase with Python 2.7.


## Backstory

This library was built while I was working on [Yorango](https://github.com/Yorango)'s ad-hoc API. Writing code to serialize various models was complex and quite tedious, resulting in messy spaghetti code for many of our API methods. The only solutions I could find online were the [Django Full Serializers](http://code.google.com/p/wadofstuff/wiki/DjangoFullSerializers) from [wadofstuff](https://github.com/mattimustang/wadofstuff) as well as some recursive `model_to_dict` snippets online -- none of which gave the option for customizable whitelists and blacklists on a per Model basis.

I ended up writing my own solution in ~100 LoC that handled basically all of my needs and replaced a ton of messy serialiazation code from all around the codebase. It was used in production with fantastic results, including on queries with quite the complexity and depth, such as:

```python

    joins = ['unit_set', 'unit_set__listing_set',
        'unit_set__listing_set__tenants', 'unit_set__listing_set__bill_set',
        'unit_set__listing_set__payment_set__payer',
        'unit_set__listing_set__contract']
    s_props = (user.property_set.all().prefetch_related(*joins)
        .serialize(*joins))

```

Had been meaning to extract and open source this as well as other various useful utility libraries I had made at Yorango and finally got the chance!

Commit message:

(docs): add Python 3 notes
- also move around lines in compatibility section

README.md, after:

# django-serializable-model

Django classes to make your models, managers, and querysets serializable, with built-in support for related objects in ~100 LoC (shorter than this README!)


## Usage

Simplest use case, just implements the `.serialize()` function on a model:

```python
from django.db import models
from django-serializable-model import SerializableModel


class User(SerializableModel):
    email = models.CharField(max_length=765, blank=True)
    name = models.CharField(max_length=100)


new_user = User.objects.create(
    name='John Doe',
    email='john@doe.com',
)

print new_user.serialize()
# {'id': 1, 'email': 'john@doe.com', 'name': 'John Doe'}
```

<br>

With an override of the default `.serialize()` function to only include whitelisted fields in the serialized dictionary:

```python
from django.db import models
from django-serializable-model import SerializableModel


class User(SerializableModel):
    email = models.CharField(max_length=765, blank=True)
    name = models.CharField(max_length=100)
    # whitelisted fields that are allowed to be seen
    WHITELISTED_FIELDS = set([
        'name',
    ])


    def serialize(self, *args, **kwargs):
        """Override serialize method to only serialize whitelisted fields"""
        fields = kwargs.pop('fields', self.WHITELISTED_FIELDS)
        return super(User, self).serialize(*args, fields=fields)


new_user = User.objects.create(
    name='John Doe',
    email='john@doe.com',
)

print new_user.serialize()
# {'name': 'John Doe'}
```

<br>

With a simple, one-to-one relation:

```python
from django.db import models
from django-serializable-model import SerializableModel


class User(SerializableModel):
    email = models.CharField(max_length=765, blank=True)
    name = models.CharField(max_length=100)


class Settings(SerializableModel):
    user = models.OneToOneField(User, primary_key=True)
    email_notifications = models.BooleanField(default=False)

    def serialize(self, *args):
        """Override serialize method to not serialize the user field"""
        return super(Settings, self).serialize(*args, exclude=['user'])


new_user = User.objects.create(
    name='John Doe',
    email='john@doe.com',
)
Settings.objects.create(user=new_user)

new_user_refreshed = User.objects.select_related('settings').get(pk=new_user.pk)

print new_user_refreshed.serialize()
# {'id': 1, 'email': 'john@doe.com', 'name': 'John Doe'}

# recursively serialize Settings object by passing the join in
print new_user_refreshed.serialize('settings')
# {'id': 1, 'email': 'john@doe.com', 'settings': {'email_notifications': False}, 'name': 'John Doe'}
```

<br>

With a foreign key relation:

```python
from django.db import models
from django-serializable-model import SerializableModel


class User(SerializableModel):
    email = models.CharField(max_length=765, blank=True)
    name = models.CharField(max_length=100)


class Post(SerializableModel):
    user = models.ForeignKey(User)
    text = models.TextField()


new_user = User.objects.create(
    name='John Doe',
    email='john@doe.com',
)
Post.objects.create(user=new_user, text='wat a nice post')
Post.objects.create(user=new_user, text='another nice post')

# called on QuerySet
print Post.objects.all().serialize()
# [{'id': 1, 'text': 'wat a nice post', 'user_id': 1}, {'id': 2, 'text': 'another nice post', 'user_id': 1}]
# adds an _id to the foreign key name, just like when using `.values()`

# called on Manager
user1 = User.objects.get(pk=new_user.pk)
print user1.post_set.serialize()
# [{'id': 1, 'text': 'wat a nice post', 'user_id': 1}, {'id': 2, 'text': 'another nice post', 'user_id': 1}]

# recursively serialize Post objects by passing the join in
print User.objects.prefetch_related('post_set').get(pk=new_user.pk).serialize('post_set')
"""
{
    'id': 1,
    'email': 'john@doe.com',
    'name': 'John Doe',
    'post_set': [{'id': 1, 'text': 'wat a nice post', 'user_id': 1}, {'id': 2, 'text': 'another nice post', 'user_id': 1}]
}
"""
```

<br>

`.serialize` takes in any number of joins as its `*args` and they can be of any depth, using the same `__` syntax as `prefetch_related`. This means if your `Post` object also had `Comment` objects, you could write:

`User.objects.prefetch_related('post_set__comment_set').serialize('post_set__comment_set')`

and get an array of `Comment` dictionaries within each `Post` dictionary.


### JSON and APIs

Since `.serialize` outputs a dictionary, one can turn it into JSON simply by using `json.dumps` on the dictionary.

If you're building an API, you can use `JSONResponse` on the dictionary as well.


## How it works

Implementing a `.serialize` method on Models, Managers, and QuerySets allows for easily customizable whitelists and blacklists (among other things) on a per Model basis.
This type of behavior was not possible a simple recursive version of `model_to_dict`, but is often necessary for various security measures and overrides.
In order to recurse over relations / joins, it accepts the same arguments as the familiar `prefetch_related`, which, in my use cases, often immediately precedes the `.serialize` calls.
`.serialize` also uses a custom `model_to_dict` function that behaves a bit differently than the built-in one in a variety of ways that are more expected when building an API (see the docstring).

I'd encourage you to read the source code, since it's shorter than this README :)


## Compatibility

_This was originally used in an older Django 1.5 codebase with Python 2.7._

<br>

Should work with Django 1.5-1.9 with Python 2.7.

Likely works with Django 1.10 and 1.11, though not 100% sure that `._meta.fields` usage works the same way in these.

Will have some problems with Django 2.0 as the Manager's `use_for_related_fields` has been removed.

`2to3` shows that there is nothing to change, so should be compatible with Python 3.x

Have not confirmed if this works with earlier versions of Django yet.

<br>

Please submit a PR or file an issue if you have a compatibility problem or have confirmed compatibility on versions.


## Backstory

This library was built while I was working on [Yorango](https://github.com/Yorango)'s ad-hoc API. Writing code to serialize various models was complex and quite tedious, resulting in messy spaghetti code for many of our API methods. The only solutions I could find online were the [Django Full Serializers](http://code.google.com/p/wadofstuff/wiki/DjangoFullSerializers) from [wadofstuff](https://github.com/mattimustang/wadofstuff) as well as some recursive `model_to_dict` snippets online -- none of which gave the option for customizable whitelists and blacklists on a per Model basis.

I ended up writing my own solution in ~100 LoC that handled basically all of my needs and replaced a ton of messy serialiazation code from all around the codebase. It was used in production with fantastic results, including on queries with quite the complexity and depth, such as:

```python

    joins = ['unit_set', 'unit_set__listing_set',
        'unit_set__listing_set__tenants', 'unit_set__listing_set__bill_set',
        'unit_set__listing_set__payment_set__payer',
        'unit_set__listing_set__contract']
    s_props = (user.property_set.all().prefetch_related(*joins)
        .serialize(*joins))

```

Had been meaning to extract and open source this as well as other various useful utility libraries I had made at Yorango and finally got the chance!
